2024/09/26, #school #business-management #notes 

> Entity: a thing with distinct and independent existence

Types of business entities:

- Your course
- Where you want to study
- You want private or public university
	- Why?
		- Public universities are usually owned by governments -> may cost low. Tuition feels may be very low for international students too. In countries like China, locals can get free education. Nothing is free so, free education comes from taxes. In states, many public universities are owned by individual states, so the fees for local residents might be lower. In UK, public universities are independent. They are not owned by the government but they do receive government funding; rest of the income comes from tuition fees.
		- UK also has some private universities, meaning all of the income comes from tuition fees. Number of private universities have grown recently. Most of the private universities are non-profit organizations: all money school gains is invested back to school. (NPO's) All the remaining profit money will be re-invested into institution. Non-profit organizations are also allowed to receive donations, which provides funds (endowments) worth billions of dollars. For example. NYU expanded to Abu-Dabi and Shanghai. 
		- Other private universities are for-profit organizations. (FPO's) Unlike NPO's, universities do not reinvest money back into the university; instead the leftover money is distributed among shareholders. While it makes it attractive for private investors, the profit objective may change the way the education institution operates and how it produces and distributes value in organization. 

> Dilemma: when you start prioritize profits, you're less likely to prioritize accessibility and quality of education.

> Non-profit organizations (NPO's)
> Endowment: donation of money or property to a nonprofit organization usually done by alumni.

Explore the different types of business organizations and how their legal status is related to their objectives and operations.

Because of the new ways in which markets, the state and society are working together to serve human needs.

4 Assessment objectives:
AO1: Knowledge and understanding
AO2: Application and analysis
AO3: Synthesis and evaluation
AO4: ...
## Distinction between private and pubic sectors
Businesses in the private sector are owned and controlled by private individuals. Decisions about businesses are taken by its owners, the government rarely takes part in decision-making. They can be small businesses, owned and run by one person like family restaurants. They can also be huge multinational companies operating globally and run by shareholders like big automobile corporations. Private sector provides goods and services at a market price. The business provides profit for their owners. These good and services can only be accessed by people who are willing and able to buy these products.

Features of the private sector, definition of private business:
- Private ownership and control
- Profits can be earned by owners
- Little or no government involvement
- Largely privately funded

Private sector plays important roles in economy:
- Creating employment
- Helping the development and growth of the economy (debatable because growth of economy is not always good)
- Providing a wide range of goods and services

## Private sector
Consists of:
- Sole traders
- Partnerships
- Privately & publicly held companies
(will be covered in 12.2)

Features of public sector:
- Public sectors and organizations are created, owned and controlled by the government.
- Provides essential goods and services.
- Usually these services are under-provided by the private sectors since they are:
	- Not profitable to provide.
	- Are unaffordable (inaccessible) to some members in society.

Public sector - National government:
National governments are often responsible for:
- Defense systems
- Transportation infrastructure
- Museums
- Hospitals
- Mail delivery services
- Embassies and consulates
- Electric Infrastructure / Energy Systems
- Cleaning Systems
- Heating Systems
- National Parks
- Waste Management
Note that if there is some need is not met, it's government's duty to meet them. Afterwards, private businesses might join to specialize these needs for some people.

Features of the public sector:
- Owned and controlled by the government
- Provides essential goods and services to citizens
- Financed by the government through taxes.

It is a shared responsibility between private and public sector to provide human needs and wants.
## For-profit commercial enterprises
The average businesses we think of go under this category. 
Profit generated by these businesses are collected and shared to the shareholders.
Ways of owning a business:
- Sole traders
	- Individuals who own and run a business alone. Remember, this is only about ownership of the business; there might be  many people working in the company.
	- Advantages: They can both reinvest profits or keep the profits for themselves.
	- Examples: Self-employed people like freelancers, fashion designers, tailors and interior decorators.
	- Sole traders can work alone or can employ people to work for them.
	- Often, these are small family businesses started with little capital investments like personal savings.
	- They are responsible for the success, failure and depth, losses of the company. 
	- If they are unable to pay their depths, bank can possess the individual possessions , including their home.
	- Disadvantages:
		- If the owner dies or is unable to work, the future of business itself may be uncertain.
	- Well-known companies which started as solo-traders:
		- Channel
		- Jeff Bezos
		- IKEA
- Partnerships:
	- Partnerships involve the creation of a business by two or pore individuals. (partners) 
	- Partnerships are governed by partnership agreements, where everything about responsibility, share, and investments will be written down in an agreement.
	- Partnership agreements include: amount of investments put in by each partner; sharing of profits and losses by each partner; role and responsibilities of each partner; rules around accepting new partners or withdrawal of existing partners. The procedures for ending the partnership.
	- Advantages: Easy to set up; greater access to finance; great efficiency and productivity; financial records remain private.
	- Disadvantages: unlimited liability; lengthier decision making potential for disagreement; legal and financial responsibility; lack of continuity
	- Well-known companies which started as solo-traders:
		- If not done truthfully / thoughtfully, it can even break family relationships between the partners.
> "Don't do partnerships" - Mr.Emen
- For-profit publicly held companies
	- Large Organization owned by many individuals known as shareholders.
	- Incorporated: (A company or an organization) formed into a legal corporation.
	- Companies (corporations)
	- Possession of a single share gives the shareholder the right to:
		- Vote at the Annual General Meeting, where decisions may be made regarding the management of the company.
		- Receive a part of the company's profits in the form of dividends if these are paid.
		- Dividend: Percentage of a company's earnings paid to its shareholders as their share of the profits.
		- Usually in the early years of the company, there are no dividends.
	- Shareholders enjoy limited liability
		- When corporation incurs losses, its owners cannot lose more than the funds that they invested in the business.
		- There's a complete separation between shareholders' personal assets and their ownership interest in the business.
		- Allows to access finances more easily.
		- Investors can buy shares of the company in hope of making a good return on their. investment without exposing themselves to undue risk.
		- Return: Amount of income that an investment makes
		- Shareholders are free to sell their shares in the company.
		- Stock exchange: Platform, marketplace where people buy and sell shares of companies, aiming to make a profit if the company's value increases.
		- Stock exchange regulations
			- Companies whose shares are traded on the stock exchange have to follow complicated regulations...
		- Board of directors manage these corporations and are elected to run the company on behalf of the shareholders.
- For-profit privately held companies

There are two types of limited liability companies:
- privately held companies
- publicly held companies
Only publicly held companies can be in stock exchange.

A privately held company is privately owned and often has family or friends as the shareholders. The shares are not sold to the wider public and are not traded on stock exchange. Financial capital is raised from family and friends who then own a share of the company. Shares generally cannot be sold to anyone else outside, without prior approval from all shareholders.