
In the article provided, the author has explored fascinating phenomenons in our human society: flying from facts. This refers to a tendency where people avoid accepting conclusions that contradict their beliefs. They often do this by disputing the validity of specific facts or reframing an original question in untestable ways are often used as they make the facts given irrelevant. The refusal to accept views contradicting their own, regardless of the logical and factual arguments leads to polarized society. This raises the question: To what extent can facts change deeply held beliefs?

The author discusses three examples of flying from facts: vaccines, Obamacare, and same-sex marriages. By analyzing these cases, we can categorize them into two major ways that individuals resist facts, contributing to polarized society: questioning authority and relying on untestable beliefs. For example, anti-vaccination advocates and conspiracy theorists question the authority of government or scientific communities, as they are influenced by emotions and a distrust of them. Meanwhile, in moral debates like sex-same marriage mentioned in the article, people often shift away from factual discussions, focusing instead on their moral sense of “right and wrong”.

In the anti-vaccination movement, despite overwhelming scientific evidence supporting the safety and necessity of vaccines, many humans reject these facts due to fundamental distrust of the government or scientific communities. This distrust is fueled by emotion and intuition. Being very subjective, these sources of data are not as nearly reliable as factual proof supported with evidence. However, they can overpower rational thoughts and result in distrust of reliable sources of information. This makes us wonder: To what extent does trust in authority influence the acceptance of knowledge? Continuing with the vaccination example, logical reasoning and reliable evidence which are the features of natural sciences, are not sufficient enough to overcome the emotional barrier which stops individuals from accepting facts. Seems like the facts alone are very limited in their ability to change human beliefs, especially when humans are influenced by their emotions and distrust of authority, yet it doesn’t stop them from using the same facts to their advantage if they align with their own ideas, support their point of view.

Focusing on untestable beliefs particular in areas like religion or faith-based knowledge, is another way people fly from facts. In article, author examines how individuals with strong religious convictions use faith as a defense against factual evidence which challenges their beliefs with an example of same-sex marriage debate, where the participants of the survey who held strong moral or religious convictions turned out to be more likely to reject scientific studies that contradict their views. This highlights the strength of faith as a way of knowing - it’s an untestable belief system that operates independently of evidence. It contrasts with the way we learn and examine things in natural sciences, where each piece of information is grounded and allowed to be questioned if more reliable evidence is given. This leads to a question: How do we know when we must examine the statement with faith or evidence? As stated earlier, facts alone do not change people’s views but rather the emotional part of it does; yet the facts can strengthen a person's beliefs if they align. In my opinion, when examining a statement, we must understand and dive deeper into its origin, before examining it with facts.

There’s another factor I believe contributes to the rejection of facts which wasn’t discussed in the article: confirmation bias. It’s when individuals seek for information that supports their beliefs while ignoring evidence contradicting them. This creates a “knowledge bubble," reinforcing the existing view, supporting close-mindedness and making it difficult to change their beliefs and opinions on something and making it easier to reject fact when it contradicts with their own worldviews. This limits their ability to engage in meaningful dialogue. I’m not saying that ignorance is necessarily a lack of knowledge, but it’s rather an avoidance of facts that challenge one’s worldview.

In conclusion, while facts play a crucial role in shaping knowledge, they have a limited power in changing people’s beliefs, especially when the knowledge brings emotion, faith, and personal biases onto table. As we’ve discussed earlier in the topics like anti-vaccination movement and same-sex marriages, individuals are more likely to reject facts when they contradict their worldviews. Subjective ways of knowing can overpower reason and evidence, especially in topics concerning ethics and religion. Furthermore, no matter how paradoxical it sounds, people do use the same facts if the fact approves their views and thoughts. This shows the ignorant nature of humankind and lack of open-mindedness in many cases. Perhaps the true challenge we’re facing is not the lack of facts but rather a courage to confront biases and emotions that prevents us from accepting the truth.